# Risks: Things you should know before using OONI

OONI's software tests are designed to test networks for symptoms of censorship,
surveillance and traffic manipulation and, in some countries around the world,
this could potentially raise **legal** and/or **extra-legal risks**. We
therefore strongly urge you to consult with lawyers *prior* to downloading,
installing and running OONI, and to carefully read the documentation below.

## Legal and extra-legal risks

The legal risks of downloading, installing and running OONI can vary from
country to country, which is why we advise you to consult with local lawyers. In
extreme cases, any form of active network measurement could be illegal, or even
considered a form of espionage.

Some questions worth asking lawyers relating to the use of OONI can include
the following:

* Does country X have laws in force that restrict or prohibit the use of
  **network measurement software**?

* Does country X have laws in force that restrict or prohibit the use of
  **censorship detection software**?

* Does country X have laws in force that restrict or prohibit the use of
  **censorship circumvention software**?

* Does country X have laws in force that restrict or prohibit certain types
  of **internet access**? (for example, is it illegal to access certain
  websites?)

* Does country X have laws in force or ISP License Agreements that require
  Internet Service Providers (ISPs) to track users' online activities and to
  retain such records?

* Does country X have laws in force that could potentially be used to
  criminalize the use of software like OONI?

* Have laws or rules in country X ever been used to criminalize groups or
  individuals based on their internet activity? (this does not necessarily need
  to be specific to network measurements)

While most countries don't have laws which specifically prohibit the use of
network measurement software, it's important to note that the use of OONI can
*still* potentially be criminalized in certain countries under other, broader
laws if, for example, its use is viewed as an illegal or anti-government
activity. OONI users might also face the risk of being criminalized on the
grounds of *national security* if the data obtained and published by running
OONI is viewed as "jeopardizing" the country's external or internal security.

Many countries have a lengthy history of subjecting digital rights activists to
various forms of abuse that could make it dangerous for individuals in these
countries to run OONI. The use of OONI might therefore subject users to severe
civil, criminal, or extra-judicial penalties, and such sanctions can potentially
include:

* Imprisonment

* Physical assaults

* Large fines

* Receiving threats

* Being placed on government watchlists

* Targeted for surveillance

In view of such legal and extra-legal threats, we strongly encourage you to
consult with lawyers and understand legal risks *prior* to using OONI. 

## Risks: Detection of OONI usage

Even though OONI is one of the various projects hosted under the [Tor
Project](https://www.torproject.org/), OONI is *not* designed for online
anonymity. On the contrary, OONI tests should be run *without* the use of Tor
software to increase the accuracy of network measurements. This means that
various legal and extra-legal risks (as explained in the previous section) might
potentially emerge if third parties (such as governments and ISPs) who view the
use of OONI as an illegal or generally "suspicious" activity detect an OONI
user.

The use of OONI can potentially be detected by third parties through the
following:

**Surveillance**

Third parties (such as your government, ISP and/or employer) monitoring your
internet activity will be able to see all web traffic generated by OONI,
including your IP address, and might be able to link it to you personally.

Many countries employ sophisticated surveillance measures that allow governments
to track individuals' online activities â€“ even if they are using a VPN or a
proxy server to protect their privacy. In such countries, governments might be
able to identify you as a OONI user regardless of what measures you take to
protect your online privacy. 

**Tested services**

Services connected to by OONI will be able to see your IP address and might be
able to detect that you are using OONI. You can view which services OONI tests
[here](https://github.com/citizenlab/test-lists/tree/master/lists).

**Physical or remote access to a user's device**

Anybody with physical or remote access to your computer, now or in the future,
might be able to see that you have installed or run OONI.

**Publication of measurements**

The public (including third parties who view the usage of OONI as illegal or
"suspicious") will be able to see the information collected by OONI once it's
published through:

* [OONI Explorer](https://explorer.ooni.torproject.org/world/)

* [OONI's list of measurements](https://measurements.ooni.torproject.org/)

Unless users **[opt-out](https://github.com/agrabeli/ooni-spec/blob/data-policy
/informed-consent/data-policy.md#opt-out)**, all measurements that are generated
through OONI tests are by default sent to OONI's measurement collector and
automatically published through the above resources.

Published data will include your approximate location, the network (ASN) you are
connecting from, and when you ran ooniprobe. Other identifying information, such
as your IP address, is *not* deliberately collected, but might be included in
HTTP headers or other metadata. The full page content downloaded by OONI could
potentially include further information if, for example, a website includes
tracking codes or custom content based on your network location. Such
information could potentially aid third parties in detecting you as an OONI
user.

## Risks: OONI tests

OONI has developed multiple software tests, each one of which is designed to
perform a different function and can therefore potentially entail different
types of legal and/or extra-legal risks.

In summary, OONI tests are designed to:

* Detect whether websites are blocked

* Detect the presence of systems which might be responsible for censorship,
  surveillance and traffic manipulation

* Examine whether censorship circumvention tools, such as Tor bridges, Psiphon,
  Lantern and OpenVPN, are blocked

We urge you to review the
**[specifications](https://github.com/TheTorProject/ooni- spec/tree/master/test-
specs)** for each OONI test carefully, prior to running it.

**Legality of tested websites**

When running either oonideckgen (OONI's software package) or OONI's **[HTTP-
request](https://github.com/TheTorProject/ooni-spec/blob/master/test-
specs/ts-003-http-requests.md)** test, you will connect to and download data
from various websites which are included in the following two lists:

* **Country-specific test list:** https://github.com/citizenlab/test-
  lists/tree/master/lists (search for your country's test list based on its
  country code)

* **Global test list:** https://github.com/citizenlab/test-
  lists/blob/master/lists/global.csv (including a list of globally accessed
  websites)

Many websites included in the above lists will likely be controversial and can
include pornography or hate speech, which might be illegal to access in your
country. We therefore recommend that you examine carefully whether you are
willing to take the risk of accessing and downloading data from such websites
through OONI tests, especially if this could potentially lead to various forms
of retribution.

**Legality of OONI software tests**

While network measurements or the use of censorship detection software might not
be illegal per se, some network tests that OONI does might be against the *terms
of service of your Internet Service Provider (ISP)* or legally questionable in
your country. 

OONI's **[HTTP-invalid-request-line](https://github.com/TheTorProject/ooni-
spec/blob/master/test-specs/ts-007-http-invalid-request-line.md)** and **[HTTP-
header-field-manipulation](https://github.com/TheTorProject/ooni-
spec/blob/master/test-specs/ts-006-header-field-manipulation.md)** tests, for
example, might not be considered illegal, but might trigger the suspicion of
your ISP (and possibly, of your government) if detected.

**Legality of anonymity software**

We encourage you to check whether the use of anonymity software (such as a VPN
or proxy) is illegal in your country if you plan on running OONI's
**[Psiphon](https://github.com/TheTorProject/ooni-spec/blob/master/test-
specs/ts-015-psiphon.md)**, **[Lantern](https://github.com/TheTorProject/ooni-
spec/blob/master/test-specs/ts-013-lantern.md)** and
**[OpenVPN](https://github.com/TheTorProject/ooni-spec/blob/master/test-
specs/ts-016-openvpn.md)** tests which require the installation of circumvention
software.

Similarly, prior to running OONI's **[bridge-
reachability](https://github.com/TheTorProject/ooni-spec/blob/master/test-
specs/ts-011-bridge-reachability.md)** test which is designed to check whether
[Tor bridges](https://bridges.torproject.org/) are blocked or not, we encourage
you to consult with a lawyer on potential risks of connecting to Tor software.

## Legal advice

We strongly encourage you to consult with lawyers and understand legal risks
*prior* to using OONI.

You can also reach out to us with specific inquiries at **legal@ooni.nu**.
Please note though that we are *not* lawyers, but we might be able to seek legal
advice for you or to put you in touch with lawyers who could address your
questions and/or concerns.

Some relevant resources include

* [Tor Legal FAQ](https://www.eff.org/torchallenge/faq.html)

* [EFF Know Your Rights](https://www.eff.org/issues/know-your-rights) 


**Note:** The use of OONI is at your *own risk* in accordance to OONI's software
[license](https://github.com/TheTorProject/ooni- probe/blob/master/LICENSE) and
neither the OONI project nor its parent organization, the Tor Project, can be
held liable.